# Metagenomic Insights into Microbial Adaptations to the North American Monsoon in Southwestern Arid Soils

### Christian Ayala-Ortiz<sup>1</sup>; Viviana Freire-Zapata<sup>1</sup>; Malak M. Tfaily<sup>1</sup>

<sup>1</sup> Department of Environmental Science, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, United States

## Abstract
Dryland ecosystems cover around 40% of the terrestrial surface and are expanding due to climate change. In the arid Southwestern USA, the North American monsoon, delivers vital rainfall from July through September. This rainfall pulse drives biological activity by alleviating water limitation for plants and microbes. However, climate-induced shifts in temperature and rainfall patterns may significantly impact microbial community activity and carbon cycling in these water-stressed biomes. Furthermore, our ability to project ecological consequences is constrained by limited knowledge of our microbial communities’ life strategies for survival, resistance, and resilience under intermittent moisture regimes. The overarching goal of our study is to elucidate genomic adaptations enabling microbial communities to capitalize on monsoon rains. We leveraged metagenomics to gain genome-centric insights into how microbiomes respond to the sudden monsoonal influx of water in soils of the Southwestern USA. Our metagenomic analysis revealed the prevalence of microbial groups characterized by high GC content such as the Actinobacteria as well as groups known for their adaptability to arid conditions such as Thermoproteota. Annotated genomes encoded more genes for hydrocarbon degradation, central carbon metabolism and energy production when rain arrived versus drier periods. These functional shifts demonstrate how arid microbiomes ramp up metabolic potential to capitalize on nutrient pulses driven by monsoonal precipitation. Overall, our findings illuminate how desert microbial communities genetically wire themselves to thrive during sporadic moisture spikes. This genetic flexibility assists persistence through dramatic resource fluctuations in global drylands.
