# MetaboTandem and MetaboDirect: software pipelines for the analysis of high throughput metabolomics data for complex environmental samples

### Christian Ayala-Ortiz<sup>1</sup>; Nathalia Graf-Grachet<sup>2</sup> ; Yuri Corilo<sup>3</sup>, Malak M. Tfaily<sup>1</sup>

<sup>1</sup> Department of Environmental Science, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, United States

<sup>2</sup> University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, United States 

<sup>3</sup> Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, Washington, United States

## Abstract

The use of metabolomics allows for the characterization of hundreds to thousands of small compounds present within a biological system, permitting a more detailed monitoring of the biological processes occurring and how they respond to environmental perturbation. These small compounds are usually the end-product resulting from complex biochemical cascades and can be consider the chemical currency used by microbes in the environment. As such, metabolomics is perfectly positioned for understanding the phenotype, linking it to the genotypes and enable the discovery of the genetic basis of metabolic variation. Like other omics, metabolomics studies generate large volumes on data whose analysis and integration are still challenging, specially in the environmental field often requiring using and combining multiple data analysis pipelines. Thus, our work focuses on the development user-friendly, open-source metabolomics data analysis pipelines with the objective of optimizing the analysis and integration of complex and heterogeneous biological and environmental datasets. Here we present two different software pipelines, MetaboTandem a command-line based pipeline and for the analysis of direct injection Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry (FTIRC-MS) which combines the easy usage of web-based applications with the customizability of more programming-friendly applications. The MetaboDirect pipeline utilizes high-resolution mass spectrometry data (peak list, intensities, and molecular formulas) and allows for its exploration, visualization, statistical analysis and the construction of biochemical transformation networks. Our second pipeline, MetaboTandem is being developed as both a modular shiny app and an R package for the analysis of untargeted liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC MS/MS) data. The MetaboTandem app provides a comprehensive data analysis pipeline from spectra preprocessing to feature annotation and statistical analysis. The use of this app will allow for a more in-depth annotation of detected metabolites by allowing the users to combine in-house libraries with online databases and in-silico predictions. These two pipelines provide a new streamlined workflow-based approach for metabolomics that promotes transparent and reproducible biological and earth system data science.
